At its best and biggest, Spirit Airlines
was the worst. The same year it was
hailed as one of the fastest growing US
domestic carriers after introducing
seven new A320s to its fleet, adding
17.9% more available seat miles, and
opening over 20 new non-stop routes,
Spirit also made news for how frequently
people complained about it. Here's the
frequency with which other carriers
received complaints over cancellations,
delays, and other flight issues over a
four-year period, and here's the
frequency of complaints at Spirit,
tripling most and trending upward. A
decade later, little had changed. The
airline had risen to the seventh largest
North American carrier by total
passengers, while also coming in second
to last in J.D. Power's customer
satisfaction ratings. But just a few
years after that, with the arrival of
flight NK1833 at Dallas/Fort Worth in
the early hours of May 2nd, 2026, the
carrier was now gone entirely. And
rather than celebrate the end of an
airline that nickel-and-dimed you on
everything, that delayed and ran late
often, that offered a generally
unpleasant flying experience, its end
was met with a sort of melancholy
nostalgia. Effectively, a final proof
that while the product wasn't pretty, it
was effective in filling a previously
unserved corner of the market. And
though easy to conflate the carrier's
collapse with its ultra-cheap approach,
the reality is that Spirit found a niche
with its ultra-low-cost model rest
hadn't quite recognized, but would
eventually race to catch up to.
With a fleet maxing out at over 200
planes and nearly 20,000 employees,
Spirit momentarily mastered its niche,
the ultra-low-cost, entirely unbundled
domestic leisure market, but this took
decades to refine. From the start,
Spirit wasn't for the business traveler,
it wasn't for the wealthy, it was for
budget-conscious leisure travelers. Born
out of a trucking company that had begun
to dip its toes into air shipping,
Spirit began in 1983 as Charter One.
Rather than actually operating its own
flights, the company was more so a tour
operator coordinating gambling
itineraries first from Detroit, Boston,
and Providence to Atlantic City, then
eventually the Bahamas and Las Vegas. A
decade in, these leisure services had
proved popular enough to justify
expansion of both the fleet and [music]
the routings. Filing with the Department
of Transportation in 1992 to run
scheduled [music] passenger services, a
new budget-friendly leisure carrier was
born. Rather than keeping its Convair
580 turboprops going, the carrier
acquired 13 DC-9s and renamed itself
Spirit Airlines. From just three routes
in 1992, the service quickly expanded.
By 1996, the network looked like this,
still based out of Detroit and running a
lot of popular domestic budget-friendly
leisure routes from the Northeast and
Midwest now to Florida and Myrtle Beach
alongside Atlantic City. As the airline
grew through the decade, this
north-south vacation destination
orientation largely remained along with
an addition of a Detroit-to-LA route in
1999 and the company's first true
international route with a service from
Fort Lauderdale to Cancun, Mexico.
Through the '90s, Spirit established
itself as a bonafide low-cost carrier.
The planes, first DC-9s, then briefly
larger MD-80s towards the end of the
decade, were neither new nor especially
amenity-laden. The service, punctuated
by a 1994 mistake that saw the company
unintentionally overbook 1,400 tickets,
was going to be hit or miss sometimes.
But ultimately, the tickets were going
to be comparatively cheap and you still
get a drink, a snack, a checked bag, and
your choice of seat. It was budget, but
budget in the same way that Southwest
was budget.
This wasn't working. In 1999, Spirit
sued Northwest Airlines in what would
become an instructive moment for the
company. They alleged that Northwest, a
legacy airline, had slashed their prices
out of Detroit and flooded the market
with tickets in an effort to push Spirit
out. Spirit would eventually settle with
Northwest, but Northwest argued that it
maintained profitability along those
routes throughout the period.
Ultimately, the strategy would help push
Spirit to relocate its headquarters to
Fort Lauderdale, but it pointed at an
issue that was increasingly beginning to
cost the company at the turn of the
century. It just wasn't quite cheap
enough to compete with legacy carriers'
cheapest options. In the early 2000s,
the company was now losing money. It was
floundering and it needed a shot in the
arm.
The transformation from cheap to
cheapest started with the 2005
appointment of Ben Baldanza as
president, who had lamented the lack of
a true European-style ultra-low-cost
carrier in the US. Baldanza gained an
all-important ally when private equity
firm Indigo Partner bought a controlling
stake in [music] Spirit a year later.
Having global experience with and an
interest in ultra-low-cost carriers,
>> [music]
>> the new controlling owner, along with
the company's new leader, went all in on
ultra-cheap. They called this strategy
unbundling. The idea that the listed
price of a flight would guarantee
nothing more than a spot somewhere on
the plane. A concept simple enough, but
one that would have to be introduced
incrementally. First, in 2007, that
meant a $10 fee for a second checked
bag, then no complimentary food or
drinks, then no free seat selection.
You'd have to pay for that. The
following year, there was now a fee for
a first checked bag, then even a fee to
print a boarding pass. Next, in 2010,
the company announced an industry
[music] first, a $45 fee for overhead
storage of carry-on items. Even Ryanair
hadn't tried such a fee yet, and the
policy created such an uproar that US
senators introduced a bill to stop it.
The airline was now well on its way to
the worst, but it was offering fares so
outrageously low that, while it was easy
to complain about the product, for the
cash-strapped college kid looking to get
south for spring break, you just
couldn't argue with the prices. At the
same time Spirit normalized unbundled
airfare to the American traveler, it was
overhauling its fleet to exclusively use
Airbus A320s as it streamlined
maintenance and maximize [music] seats
per plane. In 2011, having found its
niche and gone all in, Spirit went
public. That same year it garnered more
than 30% of its total revenue from fees.
While the morals of it all may have felt
questionable, the results were
undeniable as total passengers ballooned
from under 7 million in 2010 to almost
34 million in 2019 while the company
turned a profit each of those years. The
company was unapologetic but upfront
about its pricing model. Its ads were
aggressively targeted to young budget
travelers and its network was expanding.
At the end of the decade, the company
reached its peak. It offered about the
worst flying experience possible but it
was flying more passengers and making
more money than ever through business
model still rather unique in the
American airline scene.
As with every airline in every country,
COVID was catastrophic for Spirit. A
near complete loss of revenue.
>> [music]
>> But where their fortunes truly shifted
relative to the rest was in the recovery
years. While other US airlines marched
back towards profitability, Spirit just
didn't. For some reason, an
industry-leading business model
pre-COVID just couldn't come back to
life after. But what the calamity of
COVID masked was the continued
progression of trends that were already
starting to put pressure on the airline
in the years before.
A strange thing had been happening.
Americans were increasingly choosing to
spend more to fly. It's not that people
wanted to pay more for the same product
but rather on average, passengers were
more frequently electing to pay for more
premium offerings. As the major US
airlines started to post profits again
post-COVID, they kept remarking in their
earnings releases that their economy
cabins were flat to down whereas premium
economy and business class were driving
their revenue growth. Airlines responded
to this by building more business class.
United unveiled a new 787 configuration
with just 20% of space allocated towards
standard economy, while JetBlue and
Frontier elected to roll out business
class cabins fleet-wide for the first
time. Explanations abound for this
phenomena, but the simplest and surest
is that Gen Z and Millennials are
representing a larger and larger portion
of spending power in America, and these
younger generations have always spent
disproportionately on experiences versus
physical goods. That includes travel,
which these generations allocate a
greater portion of their income to than
others, and with more money devoted
towards travel, that's more people who
elect to treat themselves to extra
legroom, premium economy, or business
class.
It used to be that premium seats, and
especially domestic premium seats, were
primarily purchased by business
travelers with expense accounts, and so
budget airlines, which are inherently
leisure-oriented, didn't have to worry
about premium offerings. Once this
premiumization trend emerged, Spirit's
primarily economy fleet had no way of
capturing the revenue upside, while it
also suffered a downside as some of the
trend manifested through travelers
electing to pay more for a full-service
airline rather than Spirit's bare-bones
offering. The low-cost market was
eroding.
But on top of that, Spirit's ability to
capture that tranche of the market was
eroding, too. Throughout the late 2010s,
Delta, American, and United each
progressively rolled out a new fare
class that they called Basic Economy.
Essentially, they just offered the same
as Spirit. Rock-bottom prices, but with
no bag, no seat selection, no refunds,
nothing included. [music]
The major airlines' pricing algorithms
would often match or nearly match
Spirit's fares in the market, but
[music] the big airline brand names
would win customers over thanks to a
perception of better service and
reliability. In the pre-COVID years,
this did not represent an existential
threat to Spirit, just a new dimension
of competition, but it did appear to
chip away at its profits. What was a
mid-20s operating margin in 2015 fell
[music] to low 10s by the time the first
coronavirus cases emerged in Wuhan. Just
as with the premiumization trend, this
momentum appeared to continue through
COVID, and by 2024, United, for example,
reported that basic economy now
represented 16% of its domestic
passenger base.
But, while this represented a slow
erosion of Spirit's financial moat, the
airline ran into far more acute issues,
as well. Back in 2016, Spirit became the
first US airline to acquire the brand
new A320neo. [music]
The aircraft's innovative Pratt &
Whitney PW1100G geared turbofan engines
burn about 16% less fuel than the
previous generation, and considering how
much Spirit used each one of its
aircraft, this led to some real cost
savings [music] during its lucrative
late 2010s years.
But, the engines had issues. Come summer
2023, Pratt & Whitney issued a recall
notice.
>> [music]
>> They discovered that for 6 years, their
factory in New York had been using
contaminated powdered metal to create
the blades for the engine's core. The
contamination was subtle enough that the
engines passed inspections and typically
flew perfectly fine, but while
operating, microscopic cracks were
forming far sooner than expected. This
is only known to have ever caused one
actual aircraft incident, and even that
only resulted in an aborted takeoff, but
if left unaddressed, as engines got
older, more failures would inevitably
follow.
>> [music]
>> So, regulators called for inspections of
about 1,200 potentially affected
PW1100Gs, and these inspections were far
from trivial.
Operators had to park their aircraft,
physically remove engines, then ship
them to one of only about 20 shops
worldwide qualified to undertake the
process. These shops would then
disassemble the engines, inspect each
and every blade using ultrasonic
devices, then replace affected blades.
All in, this process took upwards of 250
days and there was the dual constraint
of shop capacity and replacement blade
supply, meaning aircraft groundings went
on for years. At its peak, Spirit had to
park 40 of their A320neo family aircraft
and still pay for their lease costs.
With constraint on their aircraft
supply, the airline completely pulled
out of Boston and Cleveland and heavily
cut back on Dallas flying, leaving less
opportunity for them to dig themselves
out of their financial hole. While they
did get some compensation from Pratt &
Whitney, it was [music] far from enough
to make up for the financial loss.
Spirit wasn't alone in its financial
struggles post COVID. The same pressures
eating its profits were present across
all American low-cost airlines. As cash
reserves dwindled, they all scrambled
for solutions and some chose to turn to
the most tried and tested solve for
airline financial woes, consolidation.
On February 7th, 2022, Spirit announced
[music] its intention to merge with
Frontier. The two airlines operated near
identical business models, barebones
fares on leisure-oriented routes, and
even flew the same aircraft types,
making fleet integration simple. But
they were also different in the ways
that mattered. Frontier's network was
oriented more towards the west, while
Spirit focused on the east, Caribbean,
and South America. Only 18% of the
pair's routes overlapped, meaning
combined they could become a truly
nationwide mega ultra-low-cost carrier,
representing the fifth largest airline
in America. All that was left to make
the merger plan official was for
shareholders to vote on the matter, but
considering this was a board-approved
deal,
>> [music]
>> precedent suggested that this was all
but a formality. Precedent, however, was
wrong.
JetBlue had a different plan. They
submitted an offer to buy Spirit for $33
a share, far above the 25 or so dollars
per share the Frontier deal implied. On
paper, this was a far more valuable bid.
Regardless, Spirit's board responded
with this, "Our board has unanimously
determined that JetBlue's proposal does
not constitute a quote superior proposal
under Spirit's existing merger agreement
with Frontier. We believe a combination
of JetBlue and Spirit has a lower
probability of receiving antitrust
clearance. In short, Spirit's board
believed that even if they and their
shareholders agreed to the merger
proposal, the merger was unlikely to
happen as the Department of Justice
would sue to block it under the
provisions of antitrust law arguing that
it was harmful for consumers. Spirit had
good reason to believe this. The Biden
DOJ had earned a reputation as perhaps
the most aggressively anti-consolidation
administration of the 21st century. And
in fact, JetBlue had already been
targeted by this DOJ with a lawsuit to
stop its Northeast Alliance joint
venture with American Airlines.
Spirit's perspective was that the Biden
administration would consider the
potential consumer harm of a tie-up with
Frontier quite differently than one with
JetBlue. JetBlue, after all, is not an
ultra-low-cost carrier. It
definitionally fulfills some of the
criteria of a low-cost carrier, but
operates more of a hybrid model with
extra legroom, free Wi-Fi, business
class offerings, and even long-haul
routes to Europe. Their plan, if they
were to acquire Spirit, was to fold the
ultra-low-cost carrier into the JetBlue
brand and operate it the way JetBlue
operated, meaning the US airline market
would lose the price competition that
Spirit in its current form provided. In
the Frontier merger scenario, meanwhile,
two ailing ultra-low-cost carriers would
consolidate into a larger, stronger
competitor, potentially elevating their
competitive influence on the broader
market to a point greater than the sum
of their parts.
Shareholders, however, did not share the
concern. Spirit lacked the votes to
approve the merger, and so they kept
delaying and delaying and delaying the
vote. For months, a cycle emerged of
another delay, another tweak of terms by
Frontier and JetBlue, and another delay
until the writing was on the wall.
Shareholders wanted the JetBlue offer.
It was just too tantalizing.
And so, the board approved the JetBlue
merger, shareholders soon followed, and
the two airlines started the lengthy
process of preparing to close the
transaction. But then, as foretold, the
Department of Justice sued to stop the
merger on antitrust grounds. In fact, in
their original complaint, the DOJ cited
what Spirit itself said the DOJ would
say, that this was a, quote, "high-cost,
high-fare airline buying a low-cost,
low-fare airline, and that, quote, a
JetBlue acquisition will have lasting
negative impacts on consumers." The
facts were hard to argue with. Quote,
"JetBlue estimates that when Spirit
stops flying a route, average fares go
up by 30%." At trial, the airlines
argued that even if low-cost capacity
would be eliminated, the creation of a
more meaningful non-budget competitor to
Delta, United, and American would be
pro-consumer, and they offered
divestiture of key assets like slots and
gates to offset any remaining consumer
harm. Ultimately though, the odds were
never good. From the perspective of
antitrust law, it was about [music] as
slam dunk of a case as ever makes it to
trial. There was clear, objective
reduction of competition, so from the
point at which the DOJ decided to pursue
it, it appeared far likelier than not
that they were going to win, and so they
did. Spirit was right back to where it
started, yet with hundreds of millions
of dollars of cash and two years wasted.
In the aftermath, Spirit floundered
through various half-hearted solutions
to dig itself out of its hole. It
attempted to shrink to profitability by
cutting its fleet back to less than 100
aircraft, almost entirely pulling out of
the West, and instead refocusing on
shorter distance East Coast north-south
flying to vacation destinations. In
2023, they were burning about 1.2
million dollars in cash a day to keep
afloat. In 2024, this ramped up to 3.4
million dollars, and by 2025, it
spiraled yet further to 7.5 million
dollars in financial loss per day. The
airline went through multiple rounds of
Chapter 11 bankruptcy, it rejected
another far weaker merger offer by
Frontier, and for most of 2025, it
perpetually sat on the precipice of
collapse. Yet, each time it looked
imminent, Spirit found another lifeline
to fund another few months of
operations.
But then the slow bleed was stopped by a
beheading. The Trump administration
attacked Iran, Iran retaliated by
closing the Strait of Hormuz, oil prices
spiked massively, and the airline's
single largest cost outright doubled.
The end was now inevitable. The business
had failed. Spirit had sunk, and the
best option for investors was to accept
reality and recover what [music] assets
they could. In the early hours of May
2nd, 2026, Spirit sent out its last
press release. 17,000 individuals lost
their jobs, and a 34-year legacy of safe
transport of almost half a billion
passengers came to an abrupt and
unceremonious end as the last yellow
Airbus touched down [music] at DFW.
When this end became inevitable is a
much debated question. There are plenty
of differing opinions on which decisions
could have altered this outcome.
>> [music]
>> In the reality where Spirit did
successfully merge with Frontier,
there's every world in which that would
have sunk both airlines. While
Frontier's post-COVID years were
comparatively better, they've still yet
to regain long-term profitability.
Similar to Spirit, they've been cycling
through various business model tweaks,
but there's not much in their financial
results to yet suggest they've found
their footing. While there's an argument
to be made that the consolidated larger
airline emerging from a merged Spirit
and Frontier could have competed its way
to profitability, the fact that almost
every American low-cost carrier, even
beyond the two, is still losing money
makes that incredulous.
Perhaps the more convincing argument is
that the Biden DOJ should have allowed
the JetBlue merger, even if the
antitrust case against it was strong.
Informed observers could understand all
the way back in 2023 that Spirit was
possibly on a path towards bankruptcy.
From the DOJ's perspective, the
counterfactual was Spirit remains
Spirit, when in reality, it was that
Spirit collapses. In retrospect, it
becomes fairly uncontroversial to say
that the better outcome would have been
for Spirit to consolidate into JetBlue,
saving thousands of jobs and creating
stronger competition against the majors.
Effectively, the Biden DOJ took a risk,
and the risk failed.
In any world though, Spirit could not
truly remain Spirit. The Spirit that
people love to hate, the rock-bottom
fare, Buzz Ball pedaling, bright yellow
airline for the masses, wasn't killed
off by the Biden DOJ or the
Trump-induced oil spike, or any single
action by anyone, because there was no
world in which the form the airline took
at its peak could continue into 2027 and
beyond. The American airline industry
had changed, and so Spirit's
ultra-low-cost model was as good as
dead, regardless of what mergers or
metamorphoses happened next.
In spite of Spirit's reputation among
passengers, it was undoubtedly good for
them. In a vast country with little
public transit, the airline enabled
movement for more by asking for less. It
brought people to family and friends,
births and deaths, weddings and
funerals, when it might not have
otherwise been financially possible. In
death, perhaps Spirit's strongest legacy
is the realization that as much as the
American air passenger loved to hate it,
they also hated to love it.
In research for this video, it quickly
became clear that mainstream news's
portrayals of the causes of Spirit
shutdown were often quite skewed and
incomplete. There was an enormous,
overwhelming amount of coverage, but it
was hard to know what was legitimately
useful information versus incomplete
facts trying to push a politicized
narrative. Right-leaning platforms would
attribute the shutdown on the Biden
administration's block of the JetBlue
merger, whereas left-leaning platforms
would deemphasize discussion of that
while focusing on how high fuel prices
caused by the Trump administration's war
in Iran pushed the airline carrier over
the edge. That's why I found our
sponsor, Ground News, to be a crucial
tool while writing this video. I've
partnered with them since 2023, and this
is why. Almost 600 sources covered the
Spirit Airlines story, and when I looked
on Ground News, I was able to quickly
see how each news outlet framed the
story. [music] Ground News is an app and
website that aggregates coverage of
particular news stories, source them
based on the political alignment of the
publisher, then allows you to compare
the way narratives differ between the
sides of the political spectrum. I know
that I tend to consume news sources that
align with my political bias, but that
even these sources tend to confirm my
biases by characterizing politicized
stories in a particular way. So, I find
Ground News helps a lot to figure out
what's an objective truth versus a
biased narrative. I also love that they
display the ownership for each
publication, and especially these days,
it's becoming more and more clear how
that can influence what publications
portray as the truth. And then another
feature I use is the blind spot feature,
which shows you stories that sources on
one side of the political spectrum are
talking about. I think it's fascinating
to see what certain groups of people
think is top news, while others don't
think about at all. And not only is this
interesting, but actually really
meaningful. A Duke University study on
polarization in media found that
exposure to news blind spots can
moderate political positions and reduce
polarization. Ground News is a fully
independent, subscriber-funded platform
designed for people who want to question
the narrative. So, if that sounds like
you, you can get 40% off unlimited
access to a Vantage plan, the same one I
use, by scanning the QR code on screen
or heading to the link in the
description, ground.news/wendover.
Signing up also helps support us at
Wendover, so thanks in advance if you
do.